---
title: "has the mind of a child"
date: 2020-12-04T01:03:42-07:00
lastmod: 2020-12-04T01:03:42-07:00
draft: true
---

Thoughts on a couple bad things: childish media, and childish analysis of both adult and childish media. The cultural takeover of naive, at best, and completely ignorant, at worst, criticism and analysis of naive and ignorant art. Why this bad stuff is funny and fascinating to me. 

<!--more-->

A good portion of the content I like revolves around 'bad' media and art. I divide these bad things into a couple different categories[^1]. The first: things that are intentionally bad. An example of an intentionally bad thing is Tim Heidecker's recent standup special *An Evening with Tim Heidecker*.

Heidecker's special is, by design, sometimes uncomfortable and unpleasant[^2]. People afraid of public speaking are often told the audience is their friend, that it doesn't want to see them fail, that it wants to help them through their performance or speech. But Heidecker's spoof of an overly confident, untalented asshole comedian puts the audience in the role of rooting against him. Watching it provokes many distinct feelings in a short period of time, some kind of emotional fusion for sentiments that are almost never combined. It's funny to see a guy repeatedly botch a hack 'Is Pepsi okay?' joke. It's both uncomfortable and funny to see a guy fake-crying about fake-running-over his neighbor's dog before going to a fake-vet to find out that the dog's life can't be saved because of... *OBAMACARE?! ... OBAMACARE??*. It's embarrassing to see him bring a couple up on stage and make the guy propose. It's stomach-turning to see him rag on his wife 'The Nag' for taking anti-depressants. It's not original to point out that Heidecker has worked hard to do a good job at giving a bad performance -- it's not any easier to do his special than it is to do An Actually Good Set. This kind of art isn't necessarily better than any other kind of art, but it does give me a rush of a variety feelings that usually don't go appear together, as well as a kind of stimulation that requires me to decode what I am seeing. 

It's the difference between going to an art museum and seeing a technically gorgeous and impressive landscape that is, ultimately, some green rolling hills under a blue sky. Gorgeous, I couldn't do it, I'm sure it means a lot to the painter and that I'm a tool for not appreciating it more. But I need more than one thing going on at once, something I can process. I'm no hero for this, but neither are Steve Vai fans.

I lay out the first kind of bad content, though, so that I can compare it to the second kind, and the second kind is what this post is really about.

The second kind of bad content is just... bad. It can be comprised of any number of failures: it is lazy, it has no purpose or intent, it is confused, it makes no statement, it is hack, it is dishonest. And it has no immediate layers to it. It's just fuckin' bad. Any layers it does have are provided later, either by a viewer directly or an intermediary, like MST3K riffing on an obviously bad movie. I have strong feelings about these intermediaries. Good ones are amazing, but, like too many things, most of them are awful. And good ones, naturally, sometimes mock bad things for bad reasons or force riffs on boring bad things. In this way, people good at making fun of dumb stuff can do or become hack themselves. There is some degree of subjectivity here as to when and how someone good at commentary can become annoying or boring, but it's hard to argue it plain doesn't happen. 

There are certain topics I have no interest in hearing joked over. An example: I enjoy the podcast [Qanon Anonymous](https://www.patreon.com/qanonanonymous) as something both entertaining and funny, but also clever as it dives into the minds and beliefs of conspiracy theorists. I really recommend it! I have been working through the back catalog and found an episode about a strange recent book reimagining the life of Hillary Clinton had she not married Bill. The boys were reading sections of it and having a life, but I just couldn't connect with the material. The book sounds terrible, the people who like it are as wacky as you can get, and what I'm going to get into in this post isn't even that far off from the issues with this book and its appreciators. It's just, the Clintons don't interest me. Riffing on neoliberal politics in general is not that interesting to me. What's there to say, really? The Clintons have long been out of touch

The childish media phenomenon appears on the surface to come from category two, but the way it hits me makes me treat it like category one. It makes me question how people arrive at such far gone conclusions, what it means for a creator to make something whose point seems relatively clear but is sometimes-to-often understood the exact opposite way of any literate way it could be taken.

[^1]: A tryhard fan might say that, no, his special is just funny, that they *get it* and also feel completely normal while watching it. But that's weird! The reason it is funny is because it is jarring and unexpected and unpredictable and painful. 
[^2]: Arguably, there is a third type of bad content, where a person actively interrogates the bad content or the bad content maker. This is almost never insightful done traditionally, but can be interesting when done by an Errol Morris or Isaac Chotiner.