---
title: "How to See Through Fog: A Project"
date: 2020-09-09T21:09:05-06:00
lastmod: 2020-09-09T21:09:05-06:00
draft: true
description: "A series on nice things during a bad time, finding a project edition."
tags:
- fog series
- housekeeping
---

https://www.absentmammoth.org began in a much different form all the way back in January. Getting it to where it is today took dozens of hours and occupied most of my free time for several months. Making this website gave me something positive to focus on and has been a sick learning experience. I pushed myself more while working on it than I have with anything else in ages. I need a new project now, and I encourage everyone to find their own!

<!--more-->

In January, I got it into my head that self-hosting a server would be fun. 'Why not put Ubuntu Server on an old laptop. I'll make a little website on it and do some local network stuff with it, just to prove I can. And I'll do it all without a GUI, duh.' 

 Everything I read about self-hosting made it sound easy. You just get your LAMP stack going and then you do a reverse proxy and throw Nextcloud and Ghost on it. Unfortunately, the fun of computers is that there is often more than one way to do things, which left me confused. LAMP stack... but then I learned about nginx. Do I use that or Apache? Why is composer not working out of the box for me? There are like a bazillion ways to setup a reverse proxy and I have no idea which one to do! Are they interchangeable? Actually, no! I reinstalled Ubuntu multiple times, because a clean slate was easier than trying to figure out whatever bullshit I had brought on myself. *But*, it wasn't all bad. I learned a bunch of terminal commands, the file structure of Linux, ssh keys, and... Vim (just kidding, I used nano). I also gained some insight into how I learn best. Still, setting up my own server became more of a headache than it seemed to be worth. Every time I would get Nextcloud working, going forward one step beyond would break it. Half the guides I found are for only one piece of the puzzle -- there are few all-in-one guides online that aren't either hundreds of pages long textbooks or software developer docs that only apply to their own software (and, duh, of course that would be the case). And, because of how Google works, clicking on a site's bad guide means you just get more bullshit from that site later when you try to find the solution to another problem.
 
 So, I gave up after a few nights and many hours trying to figure all of this out.
 
 Part of what pushed me to try self-hosting was [https://indieweb.org](https://indieweb.org). IndieWeb is not a huge community. It's a few dozen nerds very passionate about controlling their identities online. And, in looking around their community, it seemed like one difficulty level lower would be to use Github Pages to host a website made with a static site generator. The easiest generator to use with Pages is called Jekyll. But Jekyll's user-made themes just... look old, like they originated on Blogger. When I first looked at static site generators, I figured I would just use someone else's theme and maybe make a couple small changes if I felt like it. Trying to find a cool look for a site meant trying out *many* different static site generators. I settled on Hugo, because I saw Jamie Tanna's site [https://jvt.me](https://jvt.me) and thought it looked really good. It didn't hurt that Hugo is much simpler than something like Gatsby. (That said, my goofy digital garden placeholder @ [https://garden.absentmammoth.org](https://garden.absentmammoth.org) is made with Gatsby. However, I did not play around with Gatsby until I had my main site about where I wanted it, and I found it incredibly frustrating to work with as a novice.)
 
 So, at this point, I've got something I think looks pretty and no idea what to do next. I didn't know how to use git (and even now I only understand the basics), how Hugo works or what it was even doing when it 'generated' a site, and what I remembered of CSS from my teens felt so dated when I would look at Jamie's site in vscode. It took me weeks of trial and error to even develop the language necessary to walk through what I wanted to do with the site in my head, not to mention how to verbalize the questions I had about git, CSS, and Hugo when prowling Google for help.
 
 At this point, we're in early to mid-February. I was in the process of starting a new job after coming off of what felt like a humiliating job loss and eyeing news about the coronavirus, which looked awfully bleak. (And hey, wouldn't you know it...) But spending time on the website was fulfilling. I was learning things and able to see if not improvements, at least *changes* when adjust the site's HTML and CSS.
 
 I have always enjoyed working with my hands and seeing the Fruits of My Labor, but I had somehow forgotten making something was even a thing you could do. Working on the site brought back the nostalgia of simple things like Lego blocks to building a barn and running fence for a horse pasture. Like, damn, you can just go out and make stuff? Wild. I always forget that I once put a new roof on a duck shed until I am making something else and remember, 'Oh yeah, that was fulfilling and I should make more stuff.' 
 
 At some point, probably around mid-February, I became completely enthralled with working on the site. I understood enough about git that I could spend more of my time on the actual project. While I had initially planned to largely use Jamie's theme (he now has a new one and I am not going to dig through his Gitlab to find the old one right now), I came to realize it did *so much* that I both did not need or understand. The site I had taken from him included various possible copyright licenses on each post, a whole bunch of IndieWeb features I did not know what to do with, and html and css I did not know the purpose of. 
 
 ###### It's now time for a digression to explain how Hugo works.
 
 Static site generators generally work by taking plaintext, usually markdown, and converting it to HTML. This post here is written in markdown. When I run `hugo`, this file, which is currently named `how-to-see-project.md` and resides in my site's `content/posts` folder, will appear as a in a git submodule of my site, the `public` folder. From there, it is rendered as HTML. If you click on a post on the site now, the URL will look like: [https://www.absentmammoth.org/posts/2020/06/08/how-to-see-through-fog-persona-5-royal/](https://www.absentmammoth.org/posts/2020/06/08/how-to-see-through-fog-persona-5-royal/). This leaves off the file extension, which is .html. Every post on the site can have `index.html` appended to it and still open. For example, `https://www.absentmammoth.org/posts/2020/06/08/how-to-see-through-fog-persona-5-royal/index.html`. The location of the actual file for the post is `public/posts/2020/06/08/how-to-see-through-fog-persona-5-royal/index.html`. 
 
 But, here's one of the many puzzles I faced when learning Hugo: On my computer, the file structure of the site's backend, before it is run through the generator and placed in the `public` folder, is `mammoth/content/posts`. So... why is it `public/posts` once I run `hugo` in the site folder? Why is the Persona 5 Royal post lacking `content` in the URL? I spent *hours* learning how the site's file structure worked, not just for this example. In hindsight, it's super simple, but at the time, I did not see the rhyme or reason -- I didn't understand what was really happening when I typed `hugo` in the terminal, which meant I didn't know how the site was being made or how the subdirectories worked. 