---
title: "reverse cuomo"
date: 2020-03-03T10:52:10-07:00
lastmod: 2020-03-03=T10:52:10-07:00
draft: true
toc: true
tags: 
- music
---
For the last year, I’ve been unable to experience much joy from music — with few exceptions, even old favorites sound flat and dull. One explanation for this is that I have a brain tumor, and another is that I got these nice headphones and then some fancy pads for them that position the sound too far from my ears which creates a hollowness to their sound that I’ve been too lazy to fix or think much about. But another possible cause is that I began listening to what might qualify a “corporate alt” radio station (this also stems from laziness: sometimes fighting with the bluetooth is just too hard, and it also stems from interpersonal sensitivity: I don’t want to put something bad that I like on in front of passengers). This station plays the classics you might expect like Nirvana and Green Day. But it also spins newer acts like Twenty One Pilots, AJR, and MISSIO. And, beyond my laziness and desire not to annoy those around me, this is part of how the station tricks me: It gives me just enough Longview to keep me listening while it subjects me to the aimlessness of modern radio rock.

<!--more-->

This bland, mailed in, completely interchangeable content has become an absolute fixation for me. Who is listening to it? What motivates its makers? Does it exist solely because record companies need to show *something* to keep creditors at bay? And another natural question is, What is its lineage? Is there some common ancestor linking all of this bullshit? Or, in other words, Who can I blame for this?

My answer for that last question: Weezer. I think I can make a decent case for this. Unfortunately, to do the topic just requires listening to the Weezer discography, something that becomes a real challenge not even that far in. I could even argue that anything after Blue is a slog. However, I’ve now made it up to and including the first half of *Raditude*. I didn’t want to hate the discography as much I have ended up hating it. Nothing would give me more pleasure than to smugly say the entire thing is great and the haters are just bandwagoneers trying to identify themselves to each other by dissing the subtly genius *Red Album*. They don’t get it, is all! I would love to not have to repeat the line that Matt Sharp carried the band on his back. But in going through these albums, I cannot do these things.

As I’ve progressed through their records, I’ve found what feels like the origin of every bad thing in moderately successful fake-alt radio today. The feeble rapping the bands can’t even commit to for a full song; the literally unbelievable references to participating party culture; the delusional lyrics about having finally Made It; the garbage self-praise for recognizing that “it’s actually about being smart and not about wearing your pants down low” but also I am kind of a badass, wink; the listener’s sentiment that, no, this must all just be an ironic joke at *someone’s* expense before reading an interview and realizing, Christ, it’s sincere; the condescending benevolent sexism. Yes, all of these things are pieces of our culture that could be pulled from anywhere that is Not Weezer, it’s true, but where else can you find each of these things one-for-one all in one place? It’s just like the ocean: tide goes in, tide goes out. Rivers Cuomo sings on the AJR song “Sober Up” which opens with the AJR guys going buck with the most post-2000 era Weezer absolute gibberish: 

> I’m not where I’m supposed to be  
> I hope that you’re missing me  
> Cause it makes me feel young  
> Last time that I saw your face  
> Was recess in second grade  
> And it made me feel young  

How does a kid in second grade know what it is to feel young? The mind boggles. And what other explanation is there for these events than the hand of a greater power, be it God or Cuomo)? *Pinkerton* Weezer on has been a garbage chute for modern pop rock. My negative impression of *Pinkerton* is probably the most heretical thing I will say here, but it’s true: Go back and listen to it as an adult, not a 15-year-old. Then try to explain why it’s good to another adult human being. Its faults are too glaring. The best you can do is say it has a couple good songs.

One surprise in listening to this Weezer stuff is how often Rivers gets shamelessly confessional about how he interacts with and perceives women. This dates back even to *Blue*, with “On the Shelf.” The guy is a nasty little control freak with women, or at least pretends to be in his music. It’s hard to see why a person would pretend to be such an unsympathetic nut, though. His openness about this is, while bizarre and ultimately not at all pleasing as a listener, is fascinating. Honesty is something these corporate alt bands don’t do. Of course that kind of uncomfortable “Why are you telling me this?” honesty is not something I want from them, even if it would at least give a listener something to interrogate. But the thing of it is, it’s not just that they don’t do it, it’s that they *can’t*. Even on *Blue*, Rivers gets away with it. And as time has gone on he’s become this legendarily oddball nerd who has somehow insulated himself from people caring at all about not just his weird stuff about women, but the fact that he’s open about it at all! 

Part of what Rivers is best-known for is his music writing process, which revolves around cataloguing the music of bands he likes and then trying to ape his favorite parts. One side effect of this, I imagine, is that this results in some kind of radio guitar pop ouroboros: As time has gone on, Rivers has clearly borrowed from new and “relevant” bands beyond his initial favorites like KISS, Nirvana, and Green Day, even as these contemporary bands are borrowing from his older stuff. What a mess. At any rate, his spreadsheet habit has “inspired” me to do a breakdown of my own called “Reverse Cuomo.” It’s already been fun to sift through his dense, obtuse music and diagram out a bit of what I think has filtered down from his music to even worse stuff that now pollutes the not-pop pop on the radio. I expect to be only more horrified as I finish the rest of Weezer’s output, and am looking forward to Putting It All Together.