---
title: 'Writing and Effect'
date: 2020-07-20T21:35:00-06:00
description: 'Taibbi goes a little more ORourke, a little less Hunter S. Thompson'
tag:
- the news
draft: true
---


### Live reckoning with my dismay 
A swarm of anti-Cancel Culture arguments and personas has been growing over the last few years. This all culminated recently with the publication of [A Letter on Justice and Open Debate](https://harpers.org/a-letter-on-justice-and-open-debate/) in Harper's Magazine. Anyone reading this is likely familiar, but, just in case, this letter says: "Donald Trump is bad, but it's also bad when friends who mostly agree with each other can't be paid to say whatever they want with no repercussion. And, by the way, sunlight is the best disinfectant." (It never explains how a person as stupid and malicious as Donald Trump could win the presidency not *in spite of* but *because of* the exposure of his venal, cruel, illegal, and absurd beliefs and behaviors.) A few dozen individuals signed this letter. The signatories vary in credibility and talent, but the majority fall squarely in the 'Means Nothing to Me' category of person. Greil Marcus? Some guy. The former Leader of the Liberal Party of Canada, Michael Ignatief? Sure. A big co-signer to upset people is J.K. Rowling, who was in the news in the immediate run-up to the letter's publication for a series of childish and ignorant comments about trans issues. Another signature you might have kept off the list after recent headlines: Steven Pinker, whose name is on the Epstein flight logs.  With the exception of a handful of signers, like Chomsky and Marsalis (and, to be fair, Rowling), many people putting their name to this are paid, or best known for, merely having opinions. Whatever.

#### Enter, the heart of it
A few days ago, Matt Taibbi added a small amount of fuel to what little remains of The Harper's Letter discourse with his Substack piece [The Left is Now the Right](https://taibbi.substack.com/p/the-left-is-now-the-right). Taibbi has been, over the course of his career, a talented, funny, insightful writer and reporter. But this Substack article is garbage -- not because I disagree with it, although I do, but because it is a lazy rehash of decades of conservative paranoia masquerading as deserved concern for our modern world. Below, I try to process how Taibbi's writing made me help someone stay out of jail and what he's doing now. It's not as simple as 'people are complicated.'

<!--more-->

After his Thompson-heavy writing about the 2004 election season, Taibbi began to write more traditionally, but still with humor and cleverness, about less exciting topics like mass incarceration, civil asset forfeiture, and the 2008 housing crisis. His 2014 book *[The Divide](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Divide:_American_Injustice_in_the_Age_of_the_Wealth_Gap)* about the country's wealth gap was fresh in my mind when a neighbor's boyfriend asked me for a ride to the courthouse because he'd missed the bus to his court date. I'm not a real smart guy, so the seriousness of his situation did not sink in right away and I gave him a weak no. We'd just had a blizzard and the road conditions were awful, and I had come home with a burger and fries I was looking forward to. He asked again and the look on his face made me realize what was actually at stake. While there are a good odds I would have driven him to court without reading *The Divide*, I also know that Taibbi's book was the rational justification I had for doing it. It had the facts and anecdotes perfectly summing up this kid's situation, both as I imagined it initially and as he later explained it to me: He was finally making some money and renting in another part of town, but spent most of his time at our neighbor's place. While he was with her, some guys he didn't know well were rooming at his house. They had stored some guns there, and some of those guns had been used to shoot at cops. When the cops came calling, they thought he was involved and his court date that day was about figuring out what they were going to do with him. That's not one you want to miss. 

Over the course of our conversation, everything Taibbi had written at that time about our multi-tiered justice system wherein small time crime-doers or just plain broke people have their lives fucked up was borne out and I could see the contents of the book and this kid's life intertwining like I was friggin' Neo looking at code. This kid was doing something not plainly legal (in our town, but it is legal in much of the state) for money and it implicated other people. If he missed his appearance, it's not hard to see a world in which, even if he somehow still cleared his name of the gun-related crimes, the nature of his job and the place at which he works could both bear further scrutiny by bitter cops. Obviously, Taibbi is not the first person to have written about how insane and crooked this all is, but his writing is what gave me a framework for understanding it. And this only matters because of Taibbi's Substack article, which largely deals with race, but the kid I gave a ride to was black. I think I need to mention his race because it adds to the frustration I feel toward Taibbi's recent piece.

Please do not take me sharing this story as any glory-seeking of my own. It's something I hope any person would do for any other person. I have always ultimately credited Taibbi's book for the choice I made to help this guy out. I think about that day often not because of what I did or even because of that guy's situation, but because the entirety of it was so *absurd*. All of it felt and feels like a series of coin tosses, where everything eventually turned out okay for the kid. And, sure, that's life, a series of coin tosses. But rarely are they in such quick succession. The whole event was the combination of individual nuance but ultimate moral black-and-white that Taibbi has spent the last decade plus writing about.

Over the last year or two, Taibbi's focus on 'Russia-gate' has become increasingly unpalatable to me and I have not read much of his writing. He comes across as so irritated with American media that he cannot accurately assess the Mueller investigation, and winds up in a weird Greenwaldian space where he is giddy when Trump gets away with something the press tries to reveal and unmoved when the press reveals what Trump has tried to get away with. It's a level of personal pettiness I can relate to, but also find embarrassing to watch from a distance.

But all the above is only to set the table for the absolute dismay I felt reading his Substack article. The premise of it is this: 'The people They used to pay me to make fun of? Those old timey conservative nuts were never so bad. And the left is now those guys, and that's bad, and actually when the left does it, they're worse than those guys.' It's an ode to the needed citation, the 'according to whom?' The worst of it is stuff Bill O'Reilly would have Alan Keyes on TV to say in 2002. While most of this is typical 'kinda left guy begins his transition to out of touch old guy,' a significant portion of it requires Taibbi absolutely forgetting *at least* my entire lifetime so that he can run with, 'Can you believe they don't want to teach what clocks are at Evergreen because someone called that racist?' like Limbaugh wasn't doing that bit in 2000. The man is so close to saying 'the soft bigotry of low expectations,' except he has apparently no memory of it ever having been said to begin with. Hitchens lost his mind after 9/11 and became separated from his own history because of it, and there's some of that disease going on here, but he never got this, just, fucking out of his mind. Multiple times while reading Taibbi's *The Left is Now the Right*, I felt genuinely disoriented by the experience of reading a sentence that is both factually and spiritually wrong in the kind of way that a sentence must be for an entire piece to still hang together. I believe this happens most often when a person starts with a conclusion and then goes looking for, and thus must sometimes bend, facts and stories to support it.

### Taibbi's article
- The boobs of Dover are portrayed as almost innocent in the opener, victims of the hectoring Outsiders come to mock
- Substack, needs an editor
- 'Conservatives once tried to legislate what went on in your bedroom; now it’s the left that obsesses over sexual codicils, not just for the bedroom but everywhere.'
	- [citation needed]
- '...even  *likes* are costing people jobs'
	- links to this https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/michael-korenberg-resigns-ubc-1.5621268 which explained guy 'liked' 
	- Confuses the issue -- he's not being 'fired' for liking the tweets. In a thought experiment, a similar situation could have occurred where the guy accidentally liked a D'Souza tweet and it was called out. He would have said, no, that wasn't intentional, and not resigned. It's that he presumably held and holds these beliefs and that they have presumably affected his decision-making over the years.
		- Disconnect in Taibbi-style mindset over 'thinking' and 'doing,' which makes you wonder what they write for.
- 'Imagine how many movies Milos Forman would have had to make if Jerry Falwell had been able to get people fired this easily.'
	- Doesn't have to get them fired when he can just make them resign in a hostile work environment https://archive.vn/PDBLq
- 'Many who marched against Dick Cheney’s spy state in the early 2000s lost interest once Donald Trump became a target, then became full converts to the possibilities of centralized speech control after Russiagate, Charlottesville, and the de-platforming of Alex Jones, with even the ACLU wobbling. (Some of the only left media figures to be consistent on this issue work at the World Socialist Web Site, which has gone after woke icons like Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez over Internet censorship).'
	- [citation needed]
	- Weirdly condescending about AOC
- 'Support for the “radical transparency” concept that made Wikileaks famous receded in favor of a referendum on the political and sexual iniquity of Julian Assange: many activists today are more concerned with who than what and find nuance, contradiction, and double-meaning repulsive. Bad person = bad idea!'
	- Oddly enough, this whole article obscures the idea of nuance. And case in point here: Zero links to support this claim about 'activists,' no engagement with the idea that Assange could be a criminal with ulterior motives other than to just say it and ask that we accept it because...?
- Links to Byron York tweet about museum chart on whiteness -- chart is actually from 1978 book, not 'created' by the museum, and removed from museum material after, uh, *outrage* https://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/museums/african-american-museum-site-removes-whiteness-chart-after-criticism-from-trump-jr-and-conservative-media/2020/07/17/4ef6e6f2-c831-11ea-8ffe-372be8d82298_story.html
	- Next paragraph says it was 'inspired by' 1978 author
- Confused article, which is ultimately a slam on people like Robin (fine) but conflates her with a ton of other people 
- 'Those creation exhibits inspired multiple loving treatments from some of our best press humorists. In a predictable pattern, however, major media mostly did not go near the Smithsonian story until it became the focus of attention from chortling conservatives.'
	- Is the 'Smithsonian story' even a story? It's a museum exhibit. Some museum exhibits are bad or incomplete or confusing. Should they all be covered in the Washington Post? 
		- Problem is the 'hypocrisy detector,' where finding inconsistencies is all that matters, at the expense of any real viewpoint. Libs made fun of creation museum, and if they don't make fun of race consultant stuff, they're hypocrites. And they don't, so they are. But if you consider the two underlying things, hard to say that 'White Fragility' and the years of political organizing around creationism/ID are remotely similar in terms of size or goals.
- 'Now the left has adopted the same traits (the NBA restart played on a “Black Lives Matter”-emblazoned court is going to make those old Monday Night Football broadcasts seem chill), with a major difference: it has the bureaucratic juice to shut down mass media efforts to ridicule its thinking. These are the same pontificating, stereotyping busybodies Republicans used to be, only this time, they’re winning the culture war. '
	- This is weird. Since when is 'BLM' worthy of being ridiculed? Why do we believe they *won't* cave if they are ridiculed? Taibbi's timeline is confused, because he talks like this is a recent development and yet these guys are already 'winning the culture war'? How can that be! 
- Fundamental problem of a lot of conservative writing, which is that it provides a small glimpse of something and are told it's stupid -- there's no broader context, explanation, or attempt at understanding (all of which can be given for something and it can still turn out to be stupid). This is P.J. O'Rourke, not Hunter S.
- Taibbi upset that 'Signatories asked the University to establish differing compensation levels according to race, demanding “course relief,” “summer salary,” “one additional semester of sabbatical,” and “additional human resources” for “faculty of color,” a term left undefined.'
	- Stones, glass houses here with things left undefined
	- 'That this would be grossly illegal didn’t seem to bother the 300-plus signatories of one of America’s most prestigious learning institutions.'
		- Oh no, the lawwwwww.
	- No idea what the reasoning behind the letter is, but probably worth explaining whatever it is before lampooning it. It seems likely that these things are being asked for because, for example, a POC faculty member on sabbatical may have historically/statistically had less time to travel. Is this the correct way to solve that problem? Doubtful, but there is no examination for the root of the problem, only mockery of it. Again, if you compare the creationism/ID movement/goals/origins to this, I suspect you will find different levels of sincerity and good intent.
- The right still has more than its share of wing-nuts, the president being the most famous, and we’re allowed to laugh about them (in fact, it’s practically mandatory). 
	- Literally do not know what parenthetical is supposed to mean but would love an explanation!
- 'If we can’t laugh at time is a white supremacist construct, what can we laugh at?'
	- The problem is that none of this occurs in a vacuum. There is not only This going on, but a bunch of underlying stuff that I am sure Taibbi would agree is actually bad. To some extent, 'time is a white supremacist construct' is best left ignored as white nonsense from the 70s *as it has been for the last many decades*. Yeah, this thing that someone said ages ago and never really went anywhere? And we're panicking about it again now because...?
	- It seems worth mentioning that some of what Taibbi mocks here is old hat for conservative media. They have been making fun of 'CP time' stuff for ages, in part to demean higher ed and as an excuse to tell actually racist jokes in-between. I don't expect everyone to know this, but I certainly grew up hearing jokes about lib professors believing being on time is racism.
- 'Now that same inconsolable paranoiac comes at you with left politics, and isn’t content with ruining the odd holiday dinner, blind date, or shared cab. He or she does this infuriating interrogating at the office, in school, and in government agencies, in places where you can’t fake a headache and quietly leave the table. '
	- Such a weird opinion, given that this article starts with talk about Falwell, who did do these things, and a woman involved in a case where these things were being done